Merge programming model (#3562)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/understand/programming_model.rst

The HIP programming model makes it easy to map data-parallel C/C++ algorithms to
massively parallel, wide single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) architectures,
such as GPUs. 

While the model may be expressed in most imperative languages, (for example
Python via PyHIP) this document will focus on the original C/C++ API of HIP.

A basic understanding of the underlying device architecture helps you
make efficient use of HIP and general purpose graphics processing unit (GPGPU)
programming in general.

RDNA & CDNA architecture summary
================================

Most GPU architectures, like RDNA and CDNA, have a hierarchical structure (:ref:`rdna3_cu` and :ref:`cdna3_cu`). 

A set of Arithmetic Logical Units (ALUs), together with register files, caches and
shared memory, comprise a larger block, often referred to as a Compute Unit (CU)

> or as streaming multiprocessor. 

Reviewer: Suggestion for fusing those remaining two paragraphs and providing an actual summary.

> GPUs in general are made up of basic building blocks called compute units (CUs), that execute the threads of a kernel. These CUs provide the necessary resources for the threads: the Arithmetic Logical Units (ALUs), register files, caches and shared memory for efficient communication between the threads. 
> 
> This design allows for efficient execution of kernels while also being able to scale from small GPUs embedded in APUs with few CUs up to GPUs designed for data centers with hundreds of CUs.
> Figure :numref:`rdna3_cu: and :numref:`cdna3_cu` show examples of such compute units.

Numref might not work here, as the pictures are not enumerated, but :ref: just pastes the figure caption there, which doesn't really look nice

Author: Added your suggestion.

The HIP programming model makes it easy to map data-parallel C/C++ algorithms to
massively parallel, wide single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) architectures,
such as GPUs. 

HIP defines a model for mapping single instruction, multiple threads (SIMT) programs
onto various architectures, primarily GPUs. While the model may be expressed
in most imperative languages, (for example Python via PyHIP) this document will focus on

> the original C/C++ API of HIP.

Reviewer: This is now mostly a repetition of the previous paragraph. The last sentence could stay

```suggestion
While the model may be expressed in most imperative languages, (for example
Python via PyHIP) this document will focus on the original C/C++ API of HIP.
```

A basic understanding of the underlying device architecture helps you
make efficient use of HIP and general purpose graphics processing unit (GPGPU)
programming in general.

> RDNA & CDNA architecture summary

Reviewer: Since this page now got way longer overall, I would cut some stuff from this architecture summary, as it's just duplicating stuff from the hardware implementation chapter

Author: Reduced the content. Please check the current version.

================================

Most GPU architectures, like RDNA and CDNA, have a hierarchical structure.
The innermost piece is a SIMD-enabled vector Arithmetic Logical Unit (vector ALU or VALU).
In addition to the vector ALUs, most recent GPUs also house matrix ALUs (MALU) for
accelerating algorithms involving matrix multiply-accumulate operations.
AMD GPUs also contain scalar ALUs, that can be used to reduce the load on the

> vector ALU by performing operations which are uniform for all threads of a warp.

Reviewer: I would shrink this paragraph down. In the summary it's not important whether the CUs are made up of VALUs/SALUs or MALUs (never heard that abbreviation before, btw). The next paragraph actually gives most of the basic information needed - It's just important, that GPUs are made up of CUs, that each execute several threads/wavefronts of a kernel, and provide the necessary ressources for that.

Author: Reduced the content. Please check the current version.

  Block Diagram of a CDNA3 Compute Unit.

For implementation in hardware, multiple CUs are grouped together into
a Shader Engine on RDNA, or Compute Engine on CDNA, typically sharing some fixed function units or
memory subsystem resources.

> .. _cdna2_gcd:

Reviewer: This paragraph together with the following picture about the cdna2_gcd is not really relevant for a hardware architecture summary (and it's basically a copy from the hardware implementation chapter and takes up a lot of space)

Author: Removed.

* Not all C++ language features map cleanly to typical device architectures,
  some are very expensive (meaning slow) to implement on GPU devices, therefor
  they are forbidden in device contexts to avoid users tapping into features
  that unexpectedly decimate their program's performance. Offload devices targeted
  by HIP aren't general purpose devices, at least not in the sense that a CPU is.
  HIP focuses on data parallel computations and as such caters to throughput
  optimized architectures, such as GPUs or accelerators derived from GPU
  architectures.

* Asynchrony is at the forefront of the HIP API. Computations launched on the device
  execute asynchronously with respect to the host, and it is the user's responsibility to
  synchronize their data dispatch/fetch with computations on the device. 
  
  .. note::
    HIP does perform implicit synchronization on occasions, more advanced than other 
    APIs such as OpenCL or SYCL, in which the responsibility of synchronization mostly 
    depends on the user.

.. _programming_model_simt:

Single instruction multiple threads (SIMT)
==========================================

> The single instruction, multiple threads (SIMT) programming model behind the

Reviewer: SIMT has already been abbreviated at the beginning of this page.

Author: Fixed.

  Instruction flow of the sample SIMT program.

In HIP, lanes of the SIMD architecture are fed by mapping threads of a SIMT
execution, one thread down each lane of an SIMD engine. Execution parallelism
usually isn't exploited from the width of the built-in vector types, but across multiple threads via the thread ID constants ``threadIdx.x``, ``blockIdx.x``, etc. 

.. _inherent_thread_model:

Inherent thread model
=====================

The SIMT nature of HIP is captured by the ability to execute user-provided
device programs, expressed as single-source C/C++ functions or sources compiled
online/offline to binaries, in bulk.

All threads of a kernel are uniquely identified by a set of integral values, called thread IDs.
The set of integers identifying a thread relate to the hierarchy in which the threads execute.

> The thread hierarchy inherent to how AMD GPUs operate is depicted on the 

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
The thread hierarchy inherent to how AMD GPUs operate is depicted in the 
```

  within a block, assume the "fast index" being dimension ``x``, followed by
  the ``y`` and ``z`` dimensions.

.. _inherent_thread_hierarchy_grid:

Grid
  The outermost grouping is called a grid. A grid manifests as a single
  dispatch of kernels for execution. The unique ID of each block within a grid
  is 3-dimensional, as provided by the API and is queryable by every thread
  within the block.

Cooperative groups thread model
-------------------------------

The Cooperative groups API introduces new APIs to launch, group, subdivide,
synchronize and identify threads, as well as some predefined group-collective
algorithms, but most importantly a matching threading model to think in terms of.
It relaxes some restrictions of the :ref:`inherent_thread_model` imposed by the
strict 1:1 mapping of architectural details to the programming model. Cooperative
groups let you define your own set of thread groups which may fit  your user-cases
better than the defaults defined by the hardware.

.. note::
  The implicit groups defined by kernel launch parameters are still available 
  when working with cooperative groups.

> For further information, see :doc:`Cooperative groups how-to <hip:how-to/cooperative_groups>`. 

Reviewer: I understand the need to distinguish between the different categories of pages we have, but I think it's weird to have "how-to" just slapped at the end of sentence

Author: removed.

Memory model
============

The hierarchy of threads introduced by the :ref:`inherent_thread_model` is induced

> by the memory subsystem of GPUs. The following figure summarizes that memory

Reviewer: Typo. Missed that earlier
```suggestion
by the memory subsystem of GPUs. The following figure summarizes the memory
```

to all subsequent commands on the same stream. Multiple streams may point to
the same device and those streams may be fed from multiple concurrent host-side
threads. Execution on multiple streams may be concurrent but isn't required to
be.

Asynchronous APIs involving a stream all return a stream event which may be
used to synchronize the execution of multiple streams. A user may enqueue a
barrier onto a stream referencing an event. The barrier will block until
the command related to the event does not complete, at which point all
side effects of the command shall be visible to commands following the barrier,
even if those side effects manifest on different devices.

Streams also support executing user-defined functions as callbacks on the host.
The stream will not launch subsequent commands until the callback completes.

Device-side execution
---------------------

The SIMT programming model behind the HIP device-side execution is a
middle-ground between SMT (Simultaneous Multi-Threading) programming known from
multicore CPUs, and SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) programming
mostly known from exploiting relevant instruction sets on CPUs (for example

> SSE/AVX/Neon).

Reviewer: The remaining part now is an exact copy of the first paragraph of the SIMT section :)

Author: True. We need to rewrite this, writing out a separate issue.

  Instruction flow of the sample SIMT program.

In HIP, lanes of the SIMD architecture are fed by mapping threads of a SIMT
execution, one thread down each lane of an SIMD engine. Execution parallelism
usually isn't exploited from the width of the built-in vector types, but across multiple threads via the thread ID constants ``threadIdx.x``, ``blockIdx.x``, etc. 

.. _inherent_thread_model:

Inherent thread model
=====================

The SIMT nature of HIP is captured by the ability to execute user-provided
device programs, expressed as single-source C/C++ functions or sources compiled
online/offline to binaries, in bulk.

> All :ref:`threads <programming_model_simt>` of a kernel uniquely identified by a set of integral values, or thread IDs.
> The set of integers identifying a thread relate to the hierarchy in which threads execute.

Reviewer: Missing words. Also I think it's a bit overkill to add a reference to the section directly preceding this one.
```suggestion
All threads of a kernel are uniquely identified by a set of integral values, called thread IDs.
The set of integers identifying a thread relate to the hierarchy in which the threads execute.
```

The thread hierarchy inherent to how AMD GPUs operate is depicted in

> :numref:`inherent_thread_hierarchy`.

Reviewer: This reference does not render correctly.

Author: Fixed.

        layered on one another titled "Warp". Each of the "Warp" titled
        rectangles filled with downward pointing arrows inside.

  Hierarchy of thread groups.

Warp (or Wavefront)
  The innermost grouping of threads is called a warp, or a wavefront in ISA terms. A warp
  is the most tightly coupled groups of threads, both physically and logically. Threads 
  inside a warp are also called lanes, and the integral value identifying them is the lane ID. 
  
  .. tip::
    Lane IDs aren't queried like other thread IDs, but are user-calculated. As a consequence they are only as multidimensional as the user interprets the calculated values to be.

  The size of a warp is architecture dependent and always fixed. For AMD GPUs the wavefront is typically 64 threads, though sometimes 32 threads. Warps are signified by the set of communication primitives at their disposal, as discussed in :ref:`warp-cross-lane`.

.. _inherent_thread_hierarchy_block:

Block
  The middle grouping is called a block or thread block. The defining feature
  of a block is that all threads in a block will share an instance of memory
  which they may use to share data or synchronize with one another.

>   The size of a block is user-configurable but is maximized by the queryable

Reviewer: Shouldn't this rather be "limited", not "maximized"?
```suggestion
  The size of a block is user-configurable but is limited by the queryable
```

  within a block, assume the "fast index" being dimension ``x``, followed by
  the ``y`` and ``z`` dimensions.

.. _inherent_thread_hierarchy_grid:

Grid
  The outermost grouping is called a grid. A grid manifests as a single
  dispatch of kernels for execution. The unique ID of each block within a grid
  is 3-dimensional, as provided by the API and is queryable by every thread
  within the block.

Cooperative groups thread model
-------------------------------

The Cooperative groups API introduces new APIs to launch, group, subdivide,
synchronize and identify threads, as well as some predefined group-collective
algorithms, but most importantly a matching threading model to think in terms of.
It relaxes some restrictions of the :ref:`inherent_thread_model` imposed by the
strict 1:1 mapping of architectural details to the programming model. Cooperative
groups let you define your own set of thread groups which may fit  your user-cases
better than the defaults defined by the hardware.

.. note::
  The implicit groups defined by kernel launch parameters are still available 
  when working with cooperative groups.

> For further information, see :doc:`Cooperative groups how-to <./how-to/cooperative_groups>`. 

Reviewer: This link is not rendered properly

Memory model
============

> The hierarchy of threads introduced by :ref:`inherent_thread_model` is induced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hierarchy of threads introduced by the :ref:`inherent_thread_model` is induced
```

> by the memory subsystem of GPUs. :numref:`memory_hierarchy` summarizes that memory

Reviewer: Reference does not render properly

Author: Fixed.

namespaces and how they relate to the various levels of the threading model.

.. _memory_hierarchy:

.. figure:: ../data/understand/programming_model/memory_hierarchy.svg
  :alt: Diagram depicting nested rectangles of varying color. The outermost one
        titled "Grid", inside it are two identical rectangles titled "Block",
        inside them are ones titled "Local" with multiple "Warp" titled rectangles.
        Blocks have not just Local inside, but also rectangles titled "Shared".
        Inside the Grid is a rectangle titled "Global" with three others inside:
        "Surface", "Texture" (same color) and "Constant" (different color).

  Memory hierarchy.

Local or per-thread memory
  Read-write storage only visible to the threads defining the given variables,

>   also called per-thread memory. The size of a block for a given kernel,
>   the number of concurrent warps are limited by local memory usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  also called per-thread memory. The size of a block for a given kernel, and thereby
  the number of concurrent warps, are limited by local memory usage.
```

  This relates to an important aspect: occupancy. This is the default memory
  namespace.

Shared memory
  Read-write storage visible to all the threads in a given block.

Global
  Read-write storage visible to all threads in a given grid. There are
  specialized versions of global memory with different usage semantics which
  are typically backed by the same hardware storing global.

  Constant
    Read-only storage visible to all threads in a given grid. It is a limited
    segment of global with queryable size.

  Texture
    Read-only storage visible to all threads in a given grid and accessible
    through additional APIs.

  Surface
    A read-write version of texture memory.

Execution model
===============

HIP programs consist of two distinct scopes:

> * The host-side API running on the host processor. There are to APIs available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The host-side API running on the host processor. There are two APIs available:
```

Author: Fixed.

used to synchronize the execution of multiple streams. A user may enqueue a
barrier onto a stream referencing an event. The barrier will block until
the command related to the event does not complete, at which point all
side effects of the command shall be visible to commands following the barrier,
even if those side effects manifest on different devices.

Streams also support executing user-defined functions as callbacks on the host.
The stream will not launch subsequent commands until the callback completes.

Device-side execution
---------------------

The SIMT programming model behind the HIP device-side execution is a
middle-ground between SMT (Simultaneous Multi-Threading) programming known from
multicore CPUs, and SIMD (Single Instruction, Multiple Data) programming
mostly known from exploiting relevant instruction sets on CPUs (for example
SSE/AVX/Neon).

A HIP device compiler maps our SIMT code written in HIP C++ to an inherently
SIMD architecture (like GPUs) not by exploiting data parallelism within a
single instance of a kernel and spreading identical instructions over the SIMD
engines at hand, but by scalarizing the entire kernel and issuing the scalar

> instructions of multiple kernel instances to each of the SIMD engine lanes.

Reviewer: This is (almost) a copy of the first paragraph of the SIMT section.

Author: Removed.
